June 24, 1988

David Bryant
94 Rawson Road
Arlington, MA  02174-3425


To whom it may concern,

     I recently reworked the QUIP programs on CUG disk number
182.  I have enclosed a disk with the modified programs and the
corrected data files.  I found a number of problems with the
programs as released on the CUG disk.  Among them partially
implemented features (no seeding of the random number generator),
incompatibilities with DOS (get_login() & directory names), un-
portable file structure.  

     I updated the programs so that they compiled correctly under
Microsoft's  Quick C release 1.0 with the ANSI switch on.  Other
changes included reworking of the data structure to support the
use of an explicit SEPARATOR character.  The file names were
changed so that they all start with QUIP.  Seeding of the srand()
function with time().  Binary file opens were added where
required.  Changing the references to 'fort' and 'fortune' to
'quip'.  Compilation under UNIX is still supported through a
preprocessor define (untested as yet).  Other minor modifications
were also made.

     It is my hope that this version of quip will be more
universally useful in both the MS-DOS and UNIX worlds.  If you
have any questions I can be reached at the above address or at
(617) 641-2543.  

Sincerely,



David Bryant



     AUTHOR'S RELESAE FORM FOR CUG LIBRARY

NAME David Bryant...............DATE..6./.24./.88.

ADDRESS 94 Rawson Road............................

CITY Arlington..............STATE MA...ZIP 02174..

COUNTRY USA.......................................

PHONE (617) 641-2543.......AFFILIATION ...........

DESCRIPTION OF SUBMITTED MATERIALS:

Rewrite of QUIP programs from CUG disk 182.  Modifcations done on
an IBM AT clone.  Compiled with Microsoft Quick C ver 1.0.  Small
model.


THE SUBMITTED FILES ARE IN THEIR PRESENT REVISION LEVEL,

.X..      TO THE BEST OF MY KNOWLEDGE CURRENTLY IN PUBLIC DOMAIN


    SIGNED...........................................

    DATE.............................................


